In this section, we'll explore the
concept of asynchrony, which lets
us overlap computation with I-O.
Let's review the current state
of our heat equation simulator.
First, we copy the data from the
GPU to the host, then we write
it to disk, and finally, we use
thrust tabulate to compute the next
set of temperatures on the GPU.
Under the hood, Thrust launches
work on the GPU and waits
for it to finish.
Because Thrust Tabulate
doesn't return control until
the transformation is complete,
the CPU stays idle.
This is a missed opportunity.
Writing an efficient heterogeneous
program means making full
use of all resources.
This includes the CPU as well.
So, can we find anything
meaningful for the CPU to
do while the GPU is busy?
To answer this question, let's take
a look at the data dependencies.
The write step reads from
the host copy of the previous
temperatures, while the compute
step reads from the device copy.
Because the operations use
separate data, they don't
depend on each other.
As a result, the CPU can write
results to disk while this
GPU computes the next temperatures.
To achieve this overlap,
we'd ideally split the thrust
call into separate launching
and waiting steps.
Unfortunately, Thrust
doesn't support that.
The good news is that
Thrust doesn't implement
its algorithms directly.
Instead, it relies on another
core library called CUB to
handle work on the GPU.
Let's take a closer look at
KUB to see if it can help
us overlap compute and I.O.
Thrust calls into another layer of
the CUDA core libraries called KUB.
KUB is asynchronous, so once
you launch an operation, it
immediately hands control
back to the CPU instead of
waiting for the GPU to finish.
After launching a CUB algorithm,
Thrust uses CUDA device synchronize
to wait for CUB completion.
This CUDA device synchronize
is part of the CUDA runtime.
It essentially blocks the CPU
thread until all preceding
GPU operations have completed.
CUB offers many of the same
parallel algorithms found
in Thrust, but it doesn't
follow the standard C++ API.
It's also CUDA-specific, meaning
it doesn't provide any host-side
implementations like Thrust does.
Asynchrony is a key concept
in GPU programming, and this
example shows why.
In the first snippet, we
use Thrust tabulate.
Thrust is synchronous, so our
timer doesn't stop until the GPU
has completely finished the work.
In the second snippet, we
use CUB's device transform
function, which is asynchronous.
That means it returns control
to the CPU right away, even
if the GPU is still computing.
As a result, when we record
the end time, the GPU hasn't
actually finished yet, so it looks
like CUB takes no time at all.
Increasing the problem size doesn't
change that timing because the CPU
never waits for the GPU to finish.
This illustrates what asynchronous
execution really means.
The CPU and GPU can
work in parallel.
That's why timing measurements
can be misleading if you
don't explicitly synchronize
before checking how long
the GPU work took.
So let's do exactly that.
By adding the CUDA device
synchronize call, we force
the CPU to wait until the
GPU work is complete.
Once we add this synchronization,
both Cub and Thrust show equivalent
performance results.
The question then becomes,
how do we take advantage of
this asynchronous behavior?
Now we can finally split our
thrust call into separate
launch and wait steps.
When we launch asynchronous
work with KUB, the CPU is
freed immediately, allowing
us to start writing data to disk
while the GPU continues computing.
We then synchronize with the
GPU only after it finishes.
Since we would have waited
for the GPU anyway, we're
not losing any time.
Instead, the wait step becomes
shorter, leading to a more
efficient use of the system.
As a result, we can expect
a significant performance
boost from this approach.
In the first exercise for
this section, you'll replace
thrust tabulate with CUB
device transform to make
the computation asynchronous.
You'll also add a CUDA device
synchronized call after writing
the results to disk following
the scheme shown on the right.
As we dive deeper into asynchronous
execution, profiling and
debugging can get tricky.
It's not always clear when
tasks overlap, or if the CPU
and GPU are being fully utilized.
This is where the NVIDIA profiling
tool, Ansight Systems, steps in.
Ansight Systems gives
you a system-wide view
of both GPU and CPU activities,
visually representing
asynchronous operations.
By showing you exactly when and
where each task runs, it highlights
potential bottlenecks and uncovers
new opportunities for optimization.
In the Insight Profiling exercise,
you'll generate a profile
and look around the timeline
to identify when GPU computation
is launched, when CPU writes
data on disk, when CPU waits
for GPU, and finally, when the data
is transferred between CPU and GPU.
In the final exercise,
you'll work with the NVIDIA
Tools extension, NVTX.
When you're working on a complex
application, interpreting an
insight report can be overwhelming.
That's where NVTX and NVIDIA
Tools extension come in.
NVTX allows you to insert
custom markers and ranges
directly into your code, so that
when you view the insight report,
your labels appear in the timeline.
In the code on the side, we
use NVTX3 scoped range to
label each right step.
The range starts at the beginning
of the loop iteration and
ends automatically when it
goes out of scope.
This helps you instantly
map parts of the timeline
to the code you write.
In the optional NBTX exercise,
you're asked to annotate the
copy, compute, write, and
wait steps using NBTX ranges.
Then profile the simulator
with Insight Systems and try
locating the specific ranges.